PROF-929: Add java profiling doc (#6626)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/profiling/java.md

---
title: Profiling Java Applications
kind: documentation
further_reading:
    - link: 'https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/introducing-datadog-profiling/'
      tags: 'Blog'
      text: 'Introducing always-on production profiling in Datadog.'
---

> The Datadog Profiling library supports the Java JRE 11 and higher of both Oracle JDK and OpenJDK, but early-access versions of Java aren't supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Datadog Profiling library supports the Java JRE 11 and higher of both Oracle JDK and OpenJDK. Early-access versions of Java aren't supported.
```

> Java profiling and tracing are shipped within the same `dd-java-agent.jar` library. In order to use tracing or profiling, you must enable these functions. To enable tracing, follow the [enable tracing documentation][1].

Reviewer 2: Also azul 8 and oracle 8 w the commercial flag.

Do we need to specify jre vs jdk? Users might think it applies to one and not the other.

Reviewer 3: I don't have the technical depth to understand this feedback, what would be your phrasing proposal ?

Reviewer 2: Sorry! I originally wrote this feedback assuming is was for Hugo :-)

I think I changed my mind about mention flight recorder in this context :-) My suggestion is `The Datadog Profiler requires Java Flight Recorder. This is supported in OpenJDK 11, Oracle Java 8.TODO with a commercial license, Oracle Java 11, and Zulu Java 8.TODO.`

@jbachorik do you know the exact versions for ^?

> Java profiling and tracing are shipped within the same `dd-java-agent.jar` library. In order to use tracing or profiling, you must enable these functions. To enable tracing, follow the [enable tracing documentation][1].

Tracing is on by default.

Can we link straight to getting started rather than requiring an extra hop through a footnote?

> Java profiling and tracing are shipped within the same `dd-java-agent.jar` library. However, you can choose if you want to activate tracing or not, and same for profiling. To enable tracing, follow the [enable tracing documentation][1].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Java profiling and tracing are shipped within the same `dd-java-agent.jar` library. In order to use tracing or profiling, you must enable these functions. To enable tracing, follow the [enable tracing documentation][1].
```

> **Note**: Some specific builds will work with Datadog profiling if they support [Java Flight Recorder][2].

Reviewer 2: Do we need this?

Reviewer 3: Is Java flight recorder a requirement of the profiling lib. Or "some specific builds" refers to some non-vanilla version of java

Reviewer 2: Yes we need flight recorder, but I don't think we should say so in an intro tutorial; it won't mean anything to most users. I don't know what "some specific builds" refers to so I think we should remove it :-)

Reviewer 3: added the sentence on top

> ## Getting Started

Reviewer 2: As written, the user sort of needs to mentally assemble the various steps. I think we could minimize that (small) mental burden and, more importantly, reduce onboarding friction and errors by showing the whole thing together, followed by more detail. We might also give them a heads up that it can take a couple of minutes for the profiles to show up, which has confused a couple of early adopters. Eg

> ## Getting Started
> 
> 1. Add dd-trace-java version TODO or greater to your pom.xml or equivalent. (TODO confirm details)
> 2. Update your service invocation to look like
> ```sh
> java -javaagent:dd-java-agent.jar -Ddd.profiling.enabled=true -Ddd.profiling.api-key.file=file/with/api-key -other-datadog-apm-args -jar your-service.jar -your-service-flags (TODO confirm exact syntax)
> ```
> 3. Deploy your service, give it a minute or two to upload a profile, and [check it out at in Datadog](https://app.datadoghq.com/profiling)!
> 
> Notes:
> * -javaagent needs to come first because...
> * The profiler needs an api key because...
> * You can use environment vars instead of most system properties...

Reviewer 2: We need to fix at least some of this before we can merge.

To begin profiling applications written in any JVM based runtime:

> 1. Download `dd-java-agent.jar`, which contains the Agent class files:

Reviewer 2: Needs update for the imminent release of the open source lib.

Reviewer 2: Since we talk about both the java agent and the system agent, we should be explicit in each case about which we mean.

Reviewer 3: I think we don't reference the "system agent".. but i might be wrong.. we usuall refer to it as "the Agent" as there is only one to rule themmmm allll. Would you have a link where we talk about the system agent ?

Reviewer 2: Agreed, normally we just say "the agent". In most contexts this is right and there's no need to add more words :-) It's confusing here though, because "the agent" could refer to the "normal" agent, or the java agent which is the tracer and profiler.

Reviewer 3: The "java Agent" is a wording that should be avoided, i'm going to fix references to it to avoid confusion

> 1. Download `dd-java-agent.jar` that contains the Agent class files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Download `dd-java-agent.jar`, which contains the Agent class files:
```

    ```shell
    wget -O dd-java-agent.jar 'https://repository.sonatype.org/service/local/artifact/maven/redirect?r=central-proxy&g=com.datadoghq&a=dd-java-agent&v=LATEST'
    ```

2. Add the following JVM argument when starting your application in your IDE, Maven or Gradle application script, or `java -jar` command:

    ```shell
    -javaagent:<PATH>/dd-java-agent.jar
    ```

> 3. Enable profiling by adding `-Ddd.profiling.enabled=true` to the JVM command line (in addition to any existing APM Agent parameters).

Reviewer 2: or env var, right?

Reviewer 3: indeed.

Reviewer 2: 99% sure. @mar-kolya can you san-check please?

Reviewer 4: `-Ddd.profiling.enabled=true` - correct.

> 3. Enable profiling by adding `-Ddd.profiling.enabled=true` to the JVM command line (in addition to any existing APM agent parameters).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Enable profiling by adding `-Ddd.profiling.enabled=true` to the JVM command line (in addition to any existing APM Agent parameters).
```

4. Because profiles are sent directly to Datadog without using the Datadog Agent, you must pass a valid [Datadog API key][3] by either:

>     - Adding `-Ddd.profiling.api-key.file=<PATH>`. This file should only contain the API key as a string.

Reviewer 2: or env var

"as a string" miiight cause some people to think they need to quote the api key. I'd leave it out.

Reviewer 3: indeed, do you confirm that the env var is `DD_PROFILING_API_KEY_FILE` ?

Reviewer 2: 99% sure. @mar-kolya can you san-check please? :-)

Reviewer 4: `-Ddd.profiling.api-key-file=<PATH>` - this is correct system property
`DD_PROFILING_API_KEY_FILE` - correct env var.

>     - Adding `-Ddd.profiling.api-key.file=<PATH>`. This file should only contain the api key as a string

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Adding `-Ddd.profiling.api-key.file=<PATH>`. This file should only contain the API key as a string.
```

>     - Via the `DD_PROFILING_API_KEY=<DATADOG_API_KEY>` environment variable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Setting the `DD_PROFILING_API_KEY=<DATADOG_API_KEY>` environment variable.
```

5. Visualize your profiles in the [Datadog APM > Profiling page][4].

**Note**:

> - The `-javaagent` needs to be run before the `-jar` file, adding it as a JVM option, not as an application argument. For more information, see the [Oracle documentation][5].

Reviewer 2: An example of good and bad command lines might help clarify.

Reviewer 3: Could you give some examples?

Reviewer 2: > **Note**: `-javaagent` needs to be specified before `-jar` so it's treated as a JVM option and not an application argument.
> ```
> # Good:
> java -javaagent:dd-java-agent.jar ... -jar my-service.jar -more-flags
> 
> # Bad:
> java -jar my-service.jar -javaagent:dd-java-agent.jar ...
> ```

> - `dd-trace-java`'s artifacts (`dd-java-agent.jar`, `dd-trace-api.jar`, `dd-trace-ot.jar`) support all JVM-based languages, i.e. Scala, Groovy, Kotlin, Clojure, etc.

Reviewer 2: Seems to me this should be on the index where we're directing people to the per-language pages.

Reviewer 3: 🤔 indeed this should be referenced sooner

> - `dd-trace-java`'s artifacts (`dd-java-agent.jar`, `dd-trace-api.jar`, `dd-trace-ot.jar`) support all JVM-based languages, i.e. Scala, Groovy, Kotlin, Clojure, etc...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `dd-trace-java`'s artifacts (`dd-java-agent.jar`, `dd-trace-api.jar`, `dd-trace-ot.jar`) support all JVM-based languages, i.e. Scala, Groovy, Kotlin, Clojure, etc.
```

## Profile Types

> {{< img src="tracing/profiling/profile.png" alt="A specic profile">}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< img src="tracing/profiling/profile.png" alt="A specific profile">}}
```

| ------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| CPU in Java Code         | Shows the time each method spent running on the CPU. It includes JVM bytecode, but not native code called from within the JVM.                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Allocation               | Shows the amount of heap memory allocated by each method, including allocations which were subsequently freed.                                                                                                                                                                                     |

> | Wall Time in Native Code | Shows the elapsed time spent in native code. Elapsed time includes time when code is running on CPU, waiting for I/O, and anything else that happens while the method is running. This profile does not include time spend running JVM bytecode which is typically most of your application code.  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Wall Time in Native Code | Shows the elapsed time spent in native code. Elapsed time includes time when code is running on CPU, waiting for I/O, and anything else that happens while the method is running. This profile does not include time spent running JVM bytecode, which is typically most of your application code.  |
```

| Class load               | Shows the number of classes loaded by each method.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

> | Error                    | Shows the number of Errors thrown by each method.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Error                    | Shows the number of errors thrown by each method.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
```

> | File I/O                 | Shows the time each method spent reading from, and writing to, files.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| File I/O                 | Shows the time each method spent reading and writing files.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
```

---
title: Profiling Java Applications
kind: documentation
further_reading:
    - link: 'https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/introducing-datadog-profiling/'
      tags: 'Blog'
      text: 'Introducing always-on production profiling in Datadog.'
---

> The Datadog Profiler requires [Java Flight Recorder][1]. The Datadog Profiling library supports the Java JRE 11 and higher of both Oracle JDK and OpenJDK. Early-access versions of Java aren't supported. All JVM-based languages, i.e. Scala, Groovy, Kotlin, Clojure, etc. are supported.

Reviewer 2: What's an early-access version of java?

Why not mention zulu 8 given that it's the easiest way for java 8 users (ie _most_ java users) to try profiling today?

> Java profiling and tracing are shipped within the same `dd-java-agent.jar` library. In order to use tracing or profiling, you must enable these functions. To enable tracing, follow the [enable tracing documentation][2].

Reviewer 2: Github's being weird, but these comments are still open:

Tracing is on by default so we don't need to tell them to enable tracing.

Can we link straight to getting started rather than requiring an extra hop through a footnote?

And one more- it's a little awkward to say "To enable tracing" since they might be here only for profiling. Like of course they _do_ need to enable tracing but maybe we could phrase it more in terms of what they're trying to do. Actually, I now pretty strongly believe that we shouldn't link them to that page at all. They need _1_ line from it (`wget -O dd-java-agent.jar 'https://repository.sonatype.org/service/local/artifact/maven/redirect?r=central-proxy&g=com.datadoghq&a=dd-java-agent&v=LATEST'`), and 99% of what's there is irrelevant to trying profiling and will kill the conversion rate for anyone specifically looking to try profiling. For example, literally the first thing on the page tell them to jump through the hoops of installing the Datadog Agent, which isn't needed for profiling.

2. Add the following JVM argument when starting your application in your IDE, Maven or Gradle application script, or `java -jar` command:

    ```shell
    -javaagent:<PATH>/dd-java-agent.jar
    ```

3. Enable profiling by adding `-Ddd.profiling.enabled=true` to the JVM command line (in addition to any existing APM Agent parameters), or use the `DD_PROFILING_ENABLED=true` environment variable.

4. Because profiles are sent directly to Datadog without using the Datadog Agent, you must pass a valid [Datadog API key][3] by either:

    - Adding `-Ddd.profiling.api-key.file=<PATH>`, or use the `DD_PROFILING_API_KEY_FILE=<PATH>` environment variable. This file should only contain the API key as a string.
    - Setting the `DD_PROFILING_API_KEY=<DATADOG_API_KEY>` environment variable.

5. Visualize your profiles in the [Datadog APM > Profiling page][4].

**Note**: The `-javaagent` needs to be run before the `-jar` file, adding it as a JVM option, not as an application argument. For more information, see the [Oracle documentation][5]:

```shell
# Good:
java -javaagent:dd-java-agent.jar ... -jar my-service.jar -more-flags
# Bad:
java -jar my-service.jar -javaagent:dd-java-agent.jar ...

> ```

Reviewer 2: To summarize a slack convo- some of our products differ significantly between platform/languages and should have separate pages for each. Some, like our [api](https://docs.datadoghq.com/api/), are 95% similar, so are best served with tabs for per-language differences.

Profiling is much more like the api.

You can see the ~counter-example right here.

If someone wants to get started with profiling, they land on the index. Then they'll click java and go through Getting Started above. But then the _next_ thing in a logical flow of this content is to go back to `## Profiles` on the previous page. The content below makes the most sense once they've got a profile open. So we could add links taking them back and forth between the pages as they finish relevant sections, we could copy and paste most of the content onto per-language pages, or we could have a single page with a set of tabs for Getting Started and another set of tabs for reading the header of the profiles, and then it's super easy for them to just read through the page.

Reviewer 3: sure whatever

Reviewer 2: Thank you! ❤️ ❤️ ❤️
